---
layout: post
title: DeLanda's interpretation of Deleuze's Philosophy
share: false
---

I recently started getting acquainted with Manuel DeLanda's philosphy.
Following the advice of a colleague, I started with Delanda's "Intensive
Science and Virtual Philosophy". In this book DeLanda attempts to make the
philosophy of Gille Deleuze to scientists and analytic philosophers. Since I
have an 8 months old daughter, a PhD to finish and Game of Thrones to watch I
have limited time to invest in this project and I intend to keep my notes here
as I go along. One of the things one immediately notices about this exposition
is that it uses quite a  fair amount of mathematical machinery, without
actually writing down any equation or providing any plot. It is my intention to
rectify this here as I go along, hoping it will bring more clarity (at least
for me). 

Short disclaimer: I am not a philosopher and have very limited experience with
philosophy so I might be totally off in some points, and use the wrong
philosophical terms for stuff.

# Setting the scene

DeLanda starts by stating that Deleuze is a realist. What this means is that
Deleuze believes (or assumes) that there is a material world outside his
own perception of the world and that therefore one has to explain what this
outside world is (ontology) and how we know about it (epistemology). This
seemingly simple assumption (natural to most scientists) immediately raises the
problem of essences and essentialism. 

## Aside: the problem of essentialism

As far as I understand the problem is as follows: if we assume that stuff in
the world have their own existence, irrespective of our perceptions of it, we
might fall into the trap of using 'the essence' of things to explain the
categories of things we see around us. Lets take trees for example. There are
many kinds of trees in the world, and from each kind every individual tree is
never the same as any other. And yet we can immediately tell that the thing we
see is a tree. How can we do that? What are the things that make the tree a
tree? One way of approaching this, following Plato, is to assume that there is
an ideal tree living somewhere in the land of ideals and that all other trees
are imperfect copies of this one tree. This makes us ascribe attributes to the
thing that follow from its essence (a tree has leaves, it has a bark, it grows
in the ground, etc...). There are many philosophical problems with this
approach, and also dire social implications which were the first I encountered
in relation to essentialism. For a tree it's not a big problem if we ascribe
essences to but when applied to social groups, for example, this might become
dangerous. One might ask: 'what is the essence of the immigrants living in my
neighborhood?'. You can see where this is going: if a man is an immigrant, and
if immigrants have these essential characteristics, this man has these
characteristics. 

## Multiplicity

Deleuze is not an essentialist and he answers the question of essence by use of
the idea of morphogenesis. Things can be put in the same category because they
went through a similar (evolutionary) process. To avoid the pitfall of having
the essence transferred from the object to the process, he introduces the
rather complex concept of _Multiplicity_. The definition of multiplicity is:

>  Definition of multiplicity is....
